Okay, so let's dig in,
what is functional programming?
The word of the day,
the phrase of the day.
If you're anything like me, especially
me when I was just starting out in
programming a few years back, you heard
this term functional programming.
And it seems like it's very trendy,
very cool, like all of these buzz words,
and concepts, and fancy symbols,
like stateless, and pure net,
immutable, side effects,
referential highroller functors,
and monads that are super lazy,
and like what?
And then there's this lambda,
this weird triangle symbol floating
around everywhere, and then all of
the functional meetups have it as their
meetup logo, and what does this all mean?
You might be wondering, I certainly was.
And yes, okay it is trendy,
it got lots of mathematical terminology.
It is something that some programmers
like to think is like super cool, and
it makes them look fancy and smart.
But that's not what we're gonna focus
on today, what we're gonna focus on is
understanding what the ideas
behind functional programming are.
So, one other thing we might know
about functional programming
is that it is a style of coding,
a type of programming
that some languages support and
maybe some others don't.
So you might have heard about some
functional languages like Haskell or
Clojure.
Maybe some other ones, like for
the front-end, there's Elm.
There's some languages that support
multiple types of programming
including functional, and let's say
object oriented like F Sharp or Scala.
And then there is JavaScript,
which probably does not usually
get described as a functional language,
but is actually really wonderful for
learning the basics of functional
programming in my opinion.
And personally,
when I was learning JavaScript,
learning functional programming also
helped me get better at JavaScript, and
become a more productive
JavaScript developer.
Once I started learning some of those
basic functional programming concepts,
we're gonna talk in a moment about
why functional JavaScript is a really
nice fit.
So, one other way to understand
functional programming instead
of thinking of as style of writing
code is as a programming paradigm.
Where a paradigm in programming,
or in science,
or in the world can be thought of
as a sort of like a worldview, or
a mindset, or
a way of understanding the world,
what things are in it, and
how those things behave or interact.
Now, functional programming
is just one of many, many,
many different types of programming
paradigms that software
developers have developed over
the course of computing history.
This is by no means an exhaustive list,
there are tons of these.
But there are two really main distinct
paradigms that you might have heard about.
On the one hand on the non-functional
side, we have imperative programming.
We can think of imperative programming
as understanding the world
of computing as a series of commands.
Where programs are a series of
instructions, do this, and then do that,
and then do this other thing.
So a program becomes a series of commands
that the programmer gives to the computer,
essentially.
And one kind of sub paradigm
of the imperative mindset is
object-oriented programming,
which you may have heard of as well,
you may have studied or that maybe
the paradigm that you work in every day.
And what object-oriented programming is,
it could be the subject of a whole other
workshop, which we're not gonna get into.
But in object-oriented programming,
we use concepts like encapsulation,
where we have objects that keep
internal values to themselves,
and they can change those values.
Which when we have values
changing over time,
we have something called state which we're
gonna talk about several times today.
And then those objects since they're
encapsulated, they keep that to
themselves, but they can talk to each
other through messages that they pass by,
for example, calling methods on
other objects in the program.
So you have a kind of this message
passing lifestyle where the world of
the program is made up of
these little kind of cellular
objects that are little
encapsulated units,
and they behave by interacting
with each other through messages.
If you're curious about
how that all works,
I have a talk you can find on YouTube.
That's all about object-oriented
programming, and maybe that definition
that I just gave is a little bit different
than what you might have heard before.
Okay, now I said on the other side from
imperative programming is what we call
declarative programming.
Which is a worldview in which
instead of telling the computer this
is exactly how I want
you to do my bidding,
like we do an imperative programming with
all these commands, do this, do that.
In declarative programming, we declare,
this is what I would like
from you computer please.
And we let the computer or the program
figure out how it's going to do that
computation or
how it's going to get it to us.
So for example, if you've ever written
SQL queries where you essentially
tell the database what you want back,
but you let the implementation
figure out how exactly it's going
to join different data together,
and how it's going to filter things,
and sort things for you.
So the idea with declarative
programming is to move away from this
command oriented imperative style.
And functional programming is one
type of a declarative paradigm.
So the question now is, what is it?
If it's somehow related to
declarative programming, so
we're no longer giving commands,
what is it?
What are we doing when we're
writing functional programming?
And that is what we're
gonna be exploring today.
I claimed earlier and
I'm going to continue claiming that
functional programming is actually
boils down to one basic idea,
seems too good to be true, right?
But really, there is this one core
principle from which everything else,
all of these scary mathematical terms,
all of the monade, and monoids, and
all of the functors, and
the referential transparency.
And all this stuff kind of boils down to a
single idea which if we keep that in mind,
and kind of use that as our north star
to guide our functional programming,
we should be in good shape to start to
understand how all of these other terms,
and techniques, and
tools are kind of consequences of that.
Now, I would not have this understanding
that functional programming
is actually way simpler than a lot of
academic textbooks make it out to be.
Well, it not for an amazing community
that I was really lucky to join when I
was starting out in programming
called the Recurse Center.
This is their logo, this little computer,
you might have seen them around,
you can read more about it at recurse.com.
And while I was at the Recurse Center,
one of the people there
who is helping me learn programming
was named Mary Rose Cook.
And Mary Rose cook wrote this amazing
article which you can find and
it's linked in the materials.
You can actually click right through it or
you can read it right
here in these slides.
She wrote an article
called an Introduction to
Functional Programming Which
really boiled this down.
That sure there's all these terminologies,
there's all these scary mathematical
notations, and things like that.
But really all you need to
worry about is a single idea.
So I strongly recommend that everybody go
check out this recurse.com publication
called Code Words, check out this article,
and read through it after the course.
It uses Python, so we're gonna be
talking about JavaScript today.
But what Mary and the Recurse Center
taught me is that actually,
functional programming boils down
to a single thing, pure functions.
So that is what we're gonna
be thinking about today.
Pure functions, what are they?
Well, you could say a pure function
is a function like we're used to
writing in code.
But it's special in that it
only takes its input in and
that is the only thing, the only data
that it looks at about the world,
and all that it does is return its output.
So we could think about pure functions
as only input in and only output out.
That has some consequences that
we're gonna dig into in a moment.
You can think of a pure function in
functional programming as kind of like
a black box where you have some input
like this green circle that comes in.
And once the function has
done its computation,
you get some output like
this blue purple triangle.
Now, when we write functions,
typically day to day when we're not really
thinking about what paradigm we're using,
or we're not really trying
to be functional programs,
we're just trying to get our jobs done,
or get our coding exercises done.
We often write functions that look
a little bit more like this where it takes
some input, maybe more than one in and
returns some output out.
But it also kind of communicates
with the outside world.
So it also might be reading things
from the outside world to help it make
its computation, like for
example, what time is it?
Or what profile picture does this
user have stored on their profile,
or what is the airspeed
velocity of a swallow?
Things like that,
that aren't direct inputs to the function,
but the function may be
uses to do its computation.
And similarly, the function might
send something back to the outside
world other than its return value.
So it might do something like
log a value to the console, or
turn on a light if you're
working with LEDs, or
it might update your profile
picture on some website.
Even though none of those are actually the
return value, the output of the function.
That communication with the outside
world that sometimes our day to day
functions do,
that's what we call side effects.
It's basically any time the function
has any relation to the outside world
other than through its input arguments and
its return value.
It is doing some kind of side effect, and
that is what is not allowed
in a pure function.
So a pure function,
to put it in another way is a function
that does not have any side effects.
All it looks at, the only information
it needs is whatever is passed in to it
as an input, and the only thing it does
in the world is return its output value.
But let me suffice to say that with
all these different paradigms,
they all have their advantages and
disadvantages.
Just like everything in programming,
in software development,
it's always a matter of trade-offs.
And so each of these paradigms has
something that it can kind of teach us
about how to think about
the world of a program,
and how to conceive of the complex
programs that we wanna write,
how to break them down
into smaller entities.
And I think that it is the best
thing that we can do as
programmers to learn lots
of different paradigms, and
to think of them as different
tools in our mental toolbox, so
that we can effortlessly switch
between them when we need to.
Now that is a lifelong work,
that is a lifestyle that
we were never done with.
But hopefully, by the end of the day,
we'll have a little bit more
of an intuition of what we like about
writing code in a functional style.
And maybe also an intuition about
times when it's not so convenient.
And especially in a couple of sections
from now, we're gonna get into an exercise
where we're really comparing
imperative and functional programming.
And we'll get into those
differences in a little bit.